-introduction to Operating Systems
Von Neumann model, on running a programe, processor fetch instruction from memory, decode it, figuer out which instruction it is !!, excute it(add, jump, check condition) then move to the next instruction.

the body of software which call operating systems, resposible for making it easy to run programe like sharing memory, run many in same time, interact with devices;

refer to OS as a Virtual Machine take a physical resources and transforms it into a more general powerful easy to use virtual form of it self.

to tell OS what to do and use the features of virtual machine, 
OS provides Interfaces(APIs) to call;
OS exports  a System Calls for applicaion;
OS provides a Stadard Library to application;


OS known as resource manager; 
allows many programe to run (that sharing CPU), 
and many programe at the same time access thier own data and instruction (that sharing memory), 
and many programe to access devices(that sharing disks). and OS work on manage those resources, 
doing so efficiently or fairly or indeed with many other possible goals in mind. superVisor master control program.



2.1 Virtualizing CPU
local>>gcc -o cpu cpu.c -Wall
local>>./cpu "A"
one programe one cpu make sense;
local>>./cpu A & ; ./cpu B & ; ./cpu C & ; ./cpu D &  " in batch remove ;"
four of these programe running at the same time with only one processor;
illusion , have a very large number of CPUs, turning a single CPU to an infinite number of CPUs,
allow many programe to seemingly run at once;

you can run or stop them, or tell OS which to run, with help of interfaces(APIs) use to communicate your desire to OS;

New Question what if two programe want to run at particular time, which should run. 
answerd with OS POLICY , mechanisms (such as the ability to run multiple programs at once)


2.2 Virtualizing Memory
Memoru is just array of bits; 
read it should have an address, 
write (or update) it should have data and address;
Running programe it(the mem) accessed all the time, 
datastructure of program kept in memory and all  the instructions, 
accessed by some instruction load,store;
local>>gcc -o mem mem.c -Wall
local>>./mem
malloc() allocate some memory it equavilant to new in c++
getpid() process idenrifier unique per running process;
one programe >> As the program runs, it slowly updates(allocated memory address at XZXXXXZ) the value and prints out the result 

prompt> ./mem &; ./mem &
two programe at time
each one allocate memory at same address, it seems each updating values at XZXXXZ address independently !!
yes !! .. each runing programe has its own private memory, instead of sharing the same physical memory with other running programs;
OS is Virtualizing memory, each process has its own private virtual address space , Maping it to actual or physical address.
the address it have affect on nothing, concerned to have physical memory all to itself.
reality is physical memory is a shared resources, managed by OS.


2.3 Concurrency
Unfortunately, the problems of concurrency are no longer limited just to the OS itself. Indeed, modern multi-threaded programs exhibit the same problems.
problems must be addressed as workin on many processes;
load value, increment it, store it back into memory;
These three instructions do not execute atomically. Problem of concurrency happen.



2.4 Persistence

DRAM vs Hard Driver; store values in a volatile  vs store data persistently.
to manage storing data persistently need : software and hardware;
	hardware : hard drivers or SSDs
	software : File system is usally manage disk responding to user action like storing or creating.
no Virtualizing in hard disk can OS provide ? user will want to share this info that is this file.

open(), write(), and close()system calls are routed to the part of OS called the file system, which handles the requests.
what File system do ?
-Figure out where on disk this new data will reside, keep traking of it in various structures the file system maintains.
-Doing so needs I\O issuing requests to underlying storage device, to eighter read existing structures or update it.

Fortunately, the OS provides a standard and simple way to access devices through its system calls. 
Thus, the OS is sometimes seen as a standard library.

to handle system craches while writing ?
-intricate write protocol, such as journaling or copy-on-write;
-carefully ordering writes to disk to ensure that if failuer occures during the write sequance.


2.5 Design Goals

most basic goal is to build up some abstraction in order to make the system easy to use; 
Abstraction is fundamental to every thing in CS, makes it possible to write large problem by dividing it into small pieces;
such as Write c no care of assembly
write assembly no care about logicgates, 
logic gates of process no care about trasistors;

high performance, another way to say minimized the OVERHEADS of the OS;
overhead is arise in many forms, extra time(more instruction), extra space(memory or disk) we should minimize them.

protection between applications; many programs at same time, want to make sure bad behavior or malicious one  does not harm others, 
so harm OS itself .
isolatiob heart of one of the main principles underlaying an operating systems

High degree of reliability runung non-stop

energy-efficiency;
security against malicious application 
mobility os run on a smaller and smaller devices;

