Mechanism: Limited Direct Execution

Virtualize the CPU OS needs to share physical CPU among many jobs running seemingly at the same time.
The basic idea is simple run one process for little while, then run another one By Time Sharing.

few challenges:
	performance : adding excessive overhead to the system.
	control	: giving control to CPU , OS in charge of resources; without control, process
		  could simply run for ever access information he should not be allowed access. starvation, malisious, takeover machine.
Both hardware and OS support required.

6.1 Basic Technique: Limited Direct Execution
to make a program run as fast as one might expected, just run program directly on CPU
OS -> creates a process entry in process list(keep all running programe)
	allocate some memory pages for it 
	load programe code into memory from disk 50nsec
	locates its entry point the main() 50nsec Set up(initializing) stack with argc/argv
	Clear registers ,Execute call main()

					program -> Run main()
						   Excute return from main()
	Free memory of process
	Remove from process list	
(without any limits, yet)

A few problems rised in our quest  -> (Control)how os make sure the programe does not doing anything we don not want it to do.
(Context switch) how does OS stop running process and switch to another process,(Time sharing requied for virtualize the CPU).


OS wouldn’t be in control of anything and thus would be “just a library"


6.2 Problem #1: Restricted Operations
Restricted Operations such as I/O request to disk, or gaining access to more system resources such as CPU or memory.
how without giving process full control over the system OS and Hardware do together to do so ?

PROTECTED CONTROL TRANSFER modes of execution:
		->user mode,Applications do not have full access to hardware resources.
		->kernel mode, the OS has access to the full resources of the machine.

trap instruction into Kernel mode, and return-from-trap backe to User mode, OS tells hardware where the trap table on memory.

One approch: --> would ( let any process do whatever it wants in terms of I/O and other related operations ), 
doing so prevent  construction of many kinds of systems that are desirable, like protection would be lost, 
the process could read or write entire disk.

then take us to new Approch 
1) mode (processor mode) USER MODE; 
  code that run in user mode restricted in what it can do,(الكود ليه دور محدد )
  can't issue I/O request; doing so raise exception;
  the OS would then likely kill the process.--

2) In contrast to user mode is KERNEL MODE,
   OS run in it, code that run in kernel mode can do what it  likes,
   including issue I/O request, and all restricted instructions

what should process in user mode do when it wishes to perform some kind of privileged operation such as reading from disk(or, I/O) ?
all modern hardware provides the ability for user programs to perform a system call.
I)To execute a system call, 
    programe excute a special trap instruction simultaneously jump into kernel and raises the privilagelevel to kernel mode;
    when finished OS calls a special return-from-trap instruction, 
    returns into user program  simultaneously  reduce the privilagelevel to user mode;
II)hardware must save enough of caller's register state in order to able to return correctly (when OS issue the return-from-trap instruction),
   and that done by push (PC, flags, and a few other registers on to pre-process kernal stack), 
III)the return-from-trap will pop these values off the stack  and resume execution of the user-mode program.

one other thing left ((how does the trap know which code to run inside the OS)) (can't specify an address to jump to)? IDT
doing so make program jump anywhere into kernal which is a bad idea; kernel must carefully control which code executes upon a trap. 
and that done by setting up trap-table at boot time.
I)@boot the machine is in kernel mode, so it (free configure machine),
   OS thus tell the hardware what code to run when special exceptional event occur.
OS informs the hardware the  loacation of these trap handlers, with some kind of special instructions, 
 II)once he informed, hardware remeber location of these handlers until next reboot;
the hardware knows what to do (i.e.,what code to jump to)when systemcalls and other exceptional events take place.

privilage operation (tell hardware where the trap table), try this instruction if user mode you won't able.

-we assume each process has a kernel stack where registers are saved and restored from (by hardware) when transitioning into and out of kernel.
-we have two phases in the LDE protocol. 
	I)first at boot time the kenel initializes trap-table, and CPU remember its location, via privilage instruction.
	II)second when running process, kernel setup few things (e.g Create entry for process list, allocate memory)
		switch to CUP mode running the process; ((wishes to issue a system call)), traps back ito OS,
                which handles it and return control to process via return-from-trap, 
                then process completes its work and returns from main();(exit() exit program at this point)
                the OS cleans up and we are done;


6.3 Problem #2: Switching Between Processes
runing process on CPU means OS not running.if the OS not Running how he can do any thing at all ?
how we can gain control from CPU to OS, so he can switch between processes.

-A Cooperative Approach: Wait For System Calls <-
 process that run for too long give up CPU so that OS can decide to run other task.
in [M11], [A79] ->||
 what kind of these processes? transfer control to OS 
BY MAKING SYSTEM CALL, for example:
	open file, send message, creat a new process,
	these kind of systems explicit include yeild system call, does nothing except transfer control to OS.
BY SOME APPLICATION, for example:
	divide by zero, access memory you should not to be able to access, it generatr trap OS take control (often terminate the process)
in->cooperative scheduling system, OS take control of CPU waiting for SYSTEM CALL, or an illegal opetation.

problem appear !!
Passive Approach-> what if the process get in infinite loop, and never makes system call, what can OS Doing?

-A Non-Cooperative Approach: The OS Takes Control(عفية بجد عفية بيخدع الهارد وير وكل شوية ميلي ثانية بياخد الكنترول تاني )#thug_life أيموشن نضارة وسلسلة
 when process gets stuck in an infinite loop !! 
 without some additional help from hardware, OS can't do so much when the process refused to make system call(mistake), and return control to OS.
 How can OS gain Control ? is this case?

 [M+63]timer interrupt🔥️, timer device can be programmed to raise interrupt every Xmillisecond; so Currently running process haled(stop), 
       and pre-configured interrupt handler in the OS Run. 
       at this point OS regained control of CPU, can do what it pleases ; #معلم 
       stop the current process, and start a different one;

 USE THE TIMER INTERRUPT TO REGAIN CONTROL when process act in an non-cooperative fashion.
 this hardware feature is essential in helping the OS maintain control of the machine;

 at system call, OS -tells> hardware -which> code to run when timer interrupt occurs, at boot time the OS does that, 
 and start the timer (privilage Operation) once timer Begun. OS can feel safe Control will eventually be returned to it, 
 OS free to run user Programe , we can turn off timer,

 hardware has some resposibility when interrupt occurs; save enought of the state(registers onto kernel stack) of 
 current running process when interrupt occured, So return-from- trap instruction will able ro resume the running programe correctly;

-Saving and Restoring Context
 OS regained control, wheather co-opetatively via system call, or more forcefully by timer interrupt.\
 decision have to be made : wheather to continue running- process or switch to different one, this part made by (Scheduler);#عبد صغير بس صايع

 if decision made to switch OS does Context Switch(low level assembly)at which save a few  register values for the current-excuting process,(onto its kernel stack)
 and restore a few for the soon-to-be-excuting process.(from its kernel stack).
 important -> -> when the return-from-trap instruction excuted OS resume excutiong another process instade of returning to process that was running.

 to save context of current running process. the OS excute assembly Code to save General purpose registers,(PC, Kernelstack Pointer) and then restore them for
 soon-to-be-excuting process, by switching stackes Kernel enter Call to switch context in one process (interrupt) and returns in the context of anther(soon-t0-be-excuting)
 when OS excute a return-from-trap instrcution the soon-to-be-excuting process become the currently running process. and the context switch is complete.
	switches context by changing the stack pointer to use B'kernel stack (not A's) 

 
Worried About Concurrency?
What happens if, during interrupt or trap handling, another interrupt occurs?
OS handles these situations:
Disable interrupts during interrupt processing
Use a number of sophisticate locking schemes to protect concurrent access to internal data structures.


